This is my first fullstack project based on messaging others.

2 folders frontend and backend 
under backend first node js is installed using npm init -y
then npm install express mongoose dotenv socket.io cors for 
express: To create backend APIs.
mongoose: To connect Node → MongoDB.
dotenv: To store secrets (DB URL, passwords) safely.
socket.io: For real-time messaging.
cors: To allow frontend and backend to communicate.

next creating the index.js file, theen in package.json changing scripts for allowing npm run dev,
installing nodemon with npm install nodemon --save-dev

created a mongodb account and created new cluster with user access and ip access then pawsted the url for accessing the db in .env. 

now npm install bcryptjs jsonwebtoken for json web token.

adding login api.

created a new protected api route which verifys jwt and then decrypts the userid and includes it in the request using the middleware.

created another api for searching users, also uses middleware function for safty.

Added apis for checking the conversation between users and ability to create conversation with other users.

Frontend → Route → Middleware → Controller → Database → Response
🔹 routes → Entry point for requests

This is where the request first reaches.

Example: router.post("/login", loginUser);

This means: If a request comes to /login, call loginUser.

So this file is just a map of URLs to functions.

It does not contain business logic.

🔹 middleware → Security or pre-processing

This runs before controller.

Example: router.get("/", protect, searchUsers);

Here: protect runs first.

Its job: Check token, Verify user, Attach user info., This keeps your controller clean.

🔹 controllers → Main logic (brain)

This is where the real work happens.

Example: exports.loginUser = async (req, res) => { ... }

This:
✔ Reads request
✔ Checks database
✔ Executes logic
✔ Sends response.

🔹 models → Database blueprint

These define:
👉 How data is stored.

Example: const User = mongoose.model("User", schema);

This ensures: Structure, Validation, Relationships.

🔹 config → System setup

For: DB connection, Environment setup.

so far:

Authentication system:

Frontend → /api/auth/register
→ Check user
→ Hash password
→ Save
→ Return token.

Login system:
Frontend → /api/auth/login
→ Verify user
→ Compare password
→ Return token.

Protected APIs:

Frontend → sends JWT
Middleware → verifies
Controller → executes.

Search users:

Frontend → search request
Backend → query MongoDB
Return matching users.

Conversations:

Frontend → create chat
Backend → check if exists
→ create if needed
→ return chat.

created messaging api and now we can store the messages in the db and message another user.
now the api for fetching messages in a conversation is also created.

system now supports:
Authentication
Authorization
User search
Conversations
Sending messages
Fetching messages

✔ Messages are saved
✔ Messages are fetched
✔ Linked to conversation
✔ Sorted by time
✔ JWT security working
✔ MongoDB structure correct

now supports socket connection and we can seend and receive messages using 2 user ids and a conversation id's

instead of using the senders and receivers socket id we will use the conversation id so when multiple users are a part of a group then it will be handled automatically instead of finding receiver then socket then emit.

when user is online we emit the onlien users array and when disconnected  also, so frontend can know online and offline status.

we also limit the number of messages fetched in a conversation so the ui wont be slow.

backend now supports:
✔ authentication
✔ JWT security
✔ user search
✔ conversations
✔ messages
✔ pagination
✔ real-time sockets
✔ online users
✔ delivery status
✔ read receipts

now when a user is typing we emit "typing" to all the users in that conversation so it shows user a is typing.
✅ typing indicators
✅ conversation list
✅ pagination
✅ read receipts
✅ unread message counts

now we can edit and delete messages
message reaction, typing timeout and last seens functionality is added now

using multer for handling uploads.